Add Q3 2022 report (#57)
openwebdocs/owd-website: pages/content/posts/2022-q3-report/index.md

---
author: "Open Web Docs staff"
title: "Open Web Docs 2022 Q3 report"
date: "2022-10-27"
ShowToc: true
ShowBreadCrumbs: false
excerpt: "An update on our work in the third quarter of 2022."
---

<div class="callout">

In 2022 Q3, OWD:

> - was again the main organization maintaining the [mdn/content](https://github.com/mdn/content) repository:

Reviewer: Is there a specific reason all of these bullets start with lowercase?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- was again the main organization maintaining the [mdn/content](https://github.com/mdn/content) repository:
```

- was the major contributor to the [mdn/content](https://github.com/mdn/content) repository:

Reviewer 2: It starts with lowercase because it's not a complete sentence. But I'm not prescriptive about things like this and think it is a subjective style guide thing, so don't mind changing if you think it is better.

Reviewer: Yeah, I don't feel too strongly either, was mostly curious. :-)

- [mdn/content](https://github.com/mdn) : the main content repository for MDN Web Docs.
- [mdn/browser-compat-data](https://github.com/mdn) : the source of browser compatibility data.
- [mdn/learning-area](https://github.com/mdn) : examples supporting the MDN Learning Area.
- [mdn/interactive-examples](https://github.com/mdn) : source for MDN’s interactive examples.

# Impact

## The value of MDN

MDN is an essential resource for web developers. It:

- [has been cited from Stack Overflow more than 150,000 times in the last 5 years](https://meta.stackoverflow.com/questions/417189/which-sites-are-currently-linked-to-most-often-in-stack-overflow/417190#417190), #2 among all developer documentation sites.
- was ranked #2 (behind Stack Overflow) in the [State of JS 2021](https://2021.stateofjs.com/en-US/resources/#sites_courses), and [State of CSS 2021](https://2021.stateofcss.com/en-US/resources/#sites_courses) surveys.
- receives tens of millions of unique visitors every month.

It is therefore essential for the web developer community that MDN continues to be maintained and improved, and the core team continues to be supported in reviewing PRs from the contributor community.

> ## The contribution of Open Web Docs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## The contribution of Open Web Docs
```

## The contributions of Open Web Docs

Reviewer: Plural for contributions?

Reviewer 2: I think "contribution" is fine here. A collection of "individual things you do to help a project within a given time frame"  can be called "your contribution to the project in that timeframe", although you can also refer to the individual things as contributions. But again I don't really mind either way.

Open Web Docs is the most significant organization contributing to MDN content maintenance. Of the multiple MDN organization repositories supported by Open Web Docs, the busiest is **mdn/content**, which contains the source for MDN’s pages. This repository is extremely active:

- mdn/content is the 5th most active repository on all of GitHub, as measured by the number of commits/month according to [https://git-pulse.github.io/snapshots/](https://git-pulse.github.io/snapshots/).
- In Q3 2022, 2,607 PRs were merged into mdn/content from 535 unique contributors.

This report will demonstrate OWD’s contribution to the day-to-day maintenance of mdn/content with two metrics:

- **Quarterly PRs merged to the mdn/content repository.**
- **Quarterly number of reviews performed on each merged PR to the mdn/content repository.**

Both these metrics contain contributions by OWD team members, other organizations that help maintain the repository, and volunteer contributors. Contribution metrics are divided into the following groups:

- OWD staff

> - W3C staff (this is actually just Mike Smith)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- W3C staff (this is actually just Mike Smith)
```

- W3C staff (just Mike Smith at the moment)

- Mozilla staff
- Other (mostly volunteers, but also people paid by other organizations to work on MDN)

As [@queengooborg](https://github.com/queengooborg) works for both OWD and Mozilla, her contributions have been evenly split between each organization.

### PRs merged to mdn/content

All merged PRs: 2607
OWD: 284.5
W3C: 42
Mozilla: 136.5
Other: 2144
![Percentage pie chart. OWD: 10.9%, Mozilla: 5.2%, W3C: 1.6%, Other: 82.2%](prs.png)

This demonstrates how, of organizations contributing to mdn/content as measured by PR volume, OWD is the biggest contributor. It also shows that mdn/content gets a huge volume of contributions from volunteers: 82.2% of PRs in Q2 were “Other”, which is mostly volunteers.

### Reviews of mdn/content PRs

All merged PRs: 3090
OWD: 1942
W3C: 349
Mozilla: 193
Other: 603
![Percentage pie chart. OWD: 62.9%, W3C: 11.3%, Mozilla: 6.2%, Other: 19.5%](reviews.png)

The small OWD team provides the largest number of PR reviews to mdn/content, by a significant margin. OWD technical writers performed 63% of all reviews on merged PRs in the quarter.

# Projects

In the third quarter of 2022, OWD completed the projects listed below.

> ## Modernization of JavaScript docs

Reviewer 3: Yes, this was ambiguous.

```suggestion
## Modernization code samples on MDN
```

> During the 2010s, JavaScript evolved substantially as a language. The MDN Web Docs JavaScript documentation dates back to ES3. The docs were completely revamped around 2015 (for ES6), however, since then the docs didn’t see a major update throughout. New features were documented and used latest best practices, but docs for older features mostly demonstrate best practices of the time.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
During the 2010s, JavaScript evolved substantially as a language. The MDN Web Docs JavaScript documentation dates back to ES3. The docs were completely revamped around 2015 (for ES6); however, since then, the docs didn’t see a major update throughout. New features were documented and used the latest best practices, but docs for older features mostly demonstrate the best practices of the time.

MDN code samples followed the same pattern. We updated them to follow ES5, but no more afterward. When reading them, they looked old school and cast doubt on the accuracy of the documentation.
```

MDN Web Docs' primary audience is web developers. We want to have examples that can be used in most professional projects. Not using ES6+ features in 2022 is problematic as:

- Modern JavaScript is now easier to read and write.
- Most projects use modern JavaScript or transpilers.
- Some patterns used in the 2000s are now considered anti-patterns to avoid.

**In Q3 2022, we agreed which modern JS features to use on MDN, then applied them to most of our static examples.**

We proceeded in three phases.

1. First, we drove an open discussion to define JS features that are in common use now. The discussion was vivid and civil and was noticed in the JS community. The newsletter “JS Weekly” had a mention about it in one of its episodes, and 19 people participated in the discussion with a total of 81 messages; much more than usual MDN discussions. In that discussion, a consensus was reached about which JS features to use. Examples are, among other things:

   - using `for…of` or `.forEach` instead of classic `for(;;)` structure,
   - `let` and `const` instead of `var`
   - template literals,
   - arrow functions

> 2. In the second phase, we applied the consensus to most static examples on MDN. _We created a community of contributors to help us_. With the help of XYZ contributors and XYZ PRs, we updated most static examples on MDN. We limited ourselves to the most common features, and this changed the way MDN examples are perceived: from old-style coding examples, they are now modern-style examples.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. In the second phase, we applied the consensus to most static examples on MDN. _We created a community of contributors to help us_. With the help of more than 20 contributors and through more than 200 PRs, we updated most of the 16332 static examples on MDN. We limited ourselves to the most common features, which changed how MDN examples are perceived: from old-style coding examples, they are now modern-style examples.
```

* mdn/content is the 5th most active repository on all of GitHub, as measured by the number of commits/month according to [https://git-pulse.github.io/snapshots/](https://git-pulse.github.io/snapshots/).
* In Q3 2022, 2,607 PRs were merged into mdn/content from 535 unique contributors.

This report will demonstrate OWD’s contribution to the day-to-day maintenance of mdn/content with two metrics:

* **Quarterly PRs merged to the mdn/content repository.**
* **Quarterly number of reviews performed on each merged PR to the mdn/content repository.**

Both these metrics contain contributions by OWD team members, other organizations that help maintain the repository, and volunteer contributors. Contribution metrics are divided into the following groups:

* OWD staff
* W3C staff (this is actually just Mike Smith)
* Mozilla staff
* Other (mostly volunteers, but also people paid by other organizations to work on MDN)

As [@queengooborg](https://github.com/queengooborg) works for both OWD and Mozilla, her contributions have been evenly split between each organization.

### PRs merged to mdn/content

<table>
  <tr valign="top">

>    <td><strong>PRs merged</strong>

Reviewer 2: I reckon we could drop this, it's implicit from the title isn't it?

   </td>
   <td><code>All merged PRs: 2607</code><br>
       <code>OWD: 284.5</code><br>
       <code>W3C: 42</code><br>
       <code>Mozilla: 136.5</code><br>
       <code>Other: 2144</code><br>
       <img src="prs.png" width="750px" alt="Percentage pie chart. OWD: 10.9%, Mozilla: 5.2%, W3C: 1.6%, Other: 82.2%">
   </td>
  </tr>
</table>

This demonstrates how, of organizations contributing to mdn/content as measured by PR volume, OWD is the biggest contributor. It also shows that mdn/content gets a huge volume of contributions from volunteers: 82.2% of PRs in Q2 were “Other”, which is mostly volunteers.

### Reviews of mdn/content PRs

<table>
  <tr valign="top">

>    <td><strong>Reviews on merged PRs</strong>

Reviewer 2: This one too (this one especially, because the wrapping is too much).

   </td>
   <td><code>All merged PRs: 3090</code><br>
       <code>OWD: 1942</code><br>
       <code>W3C: 349</code><br>
       <code>Mozilla: 193</code><br>
       <code>Other: 603</code><br>
       <img src="reviews.png" width="750px" alt="Percentage pie chart. OWD: 62.9%, W3C: 11.3%, Mozilla: 6.2%, Other: 19.5%">
   </td>
  </tr>
</table>

The small OWD team provides the largest number of PR reviews to mdn/content, by a significant margin. OWD technical writers performed 63% of all reviews on merged PRs in the quarter.

# Projects

In the third quarter of 2022, OWD completed the projects listed below.

> ## Modernization of JavaScript docs

Reviewer 2: This is not just "JavaScript docs" but is "All JS code samples on MDN" isn't it?

I think this is a great section, the only comment really is that I don't get a sense of the scale of this change. It is possible to give an idea? How many pages, roughly, have been updated in this project? How many PRs? (I mean, it's impressive because it's a really huge project, not because updating examples to use modern JS is particularly hard).

I don't think this is essential but if it's not much work, maybe worth doing.

Author: "Modernizing code samples on MDN" might be the better heading here. What do you think, @teoli2003?

Reviewer 2: It also says, just below:

> The MDN Web Docs JavaScript documentation dates back to ES3. The docs were completely revamped around 2015 (for ES6), however, since then the docs didn’t see a major update throughout. New features were documented and used latest best practices, but docs for older features mostly demonstrate best practices of the time.

...which strongly implies that the scope of this was the JS docs.

Reviewer 3: I added a paragraph to link this historic to all code samples.

MDN Web Docs' primary audience is web developers. We want to have examples that can be used in most professional projects. Not using ES6+ features in 2022 is problematic as:

* Modern JavaScript is now easier to read and write.
* Most projects use modern JavaScript or transpilers.
* Some patterns used in the 2000s are now considered anti-patterns to avoid.

**In Q3 2022, we agreed which modern JS features to use on MDN, then applied them to most of our static examples.**

We proceeded in three phases.

1. First, we drove an open discussion to define JS features that are in common use now. The discussion was vivid and civil and was noticed in the JS community. The newsletter “JS Weekly” had a mention about it in one of its episodes, and 19 people participated in the discussion with a total of 81 messages; much more than usual MDN discussions. In that discussion, a consensus was reached about which JS features to use. Examples are, among other things:
    - using `for…of` or `.forEach` instead of classic `for(;;)` structure,
    - `let` and `const` instead of `var`
    - template literals,
    - arrow functions

> 2. In the second phase, we applied what has been consensus to most static examples of MDN. _We created a community of contributors to help us_. With the help of XYZ contributors and XYZ PRs, we updated most static examples of MDN. We limited ourselves to the most common features, and this changed the way MDN examples are perceived: from old-style coding examples, they are now modern-style examples.

Reviewer 2: Oh I see you will have some numbers here.  :)

> 2. In the second phase, we applied what has been consensus to most static examples of MDN. _We created a community of contributors to help us_. With the help of XYZ contributors and XYZ PRs, we updated most static examples of MDN. We limited ourselves to the most common features, and this changed the way MDN examples are perceived: from old-style coding examples, they are now modern-style examples.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. In the second phase, we applied the consensus to most static examples on MDN. _We created a community of contributors to help us_. With the help of XYZ contributors and XYZ PRs, we updated most static examples on MDN. We limited ourselves to the most common features, and this changed the way MDN examples are perceived: from old-style coding examples, they are now modern-style examples.
```

3. Finally, the third phase consisted of updating MDN's JS coding guidelines. We also worked by consensus between all maintainers of MDN and created a single PR with 298 comments. This allowed us to communicate the new style to most maintainers but also to be able to refer to agreed conventions when divergences occur.

MDN is so large that there is still a lot to do after this project. For now, we focused on static examples on MDN pages. MDN also has interactive examples and a corpus of external examples (js-examples, css-examples, dom-examples, …); these examples should also be updated to the new guidelines. We hope to do this in the future. Still, as this is a significant piece of work, we would like to group this with a few other modernization activities that are needed: we would like to lint these examples with ESlint (to detect errors), avoid outdated APIs (like using the Fetch API instead of XHR), as well as fix any accessibility and semantic issues. We think it is a good idea to triage these structural issues, drive discussions about best practices and then apply the changes to all MDN pages.

> To sum up, we renovated all static examples of MDN. They use modern JS and can be more easily copied and pasted into real projects. They also teach better practices to developers. Working with the community on this project has been gratifying, and as it helped to finalize the whole project in a quarter when otherwise these mass-changes on thousands of MDN pages can take much longer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To sum up, we renovated all static examples on MDN. They now use modern JS and can be more easily copied and pasted into real projects. They also teach better practices to developers. Working with the community on this project has been gratifying, and it helped us finish the whole project in a quarter when otherwise these mass-changes on thousands of MDN pages can take much longer.
```

## Linting Markdown

> The migration of MDN pages to Markdown improved the quality of MDN pages and its maintainability. In comparison to HTML, Markdown is easier to read on GitHub and leads to simpler diffs when reviewing PRs. It is also a lot more concise and resulting in more homogeneity of the source of MDN documents.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The migration of MDN pages to Markdown improved the quality of MDN pages and its maintainability. In comparison to HTML, Markdown is easier to read on GitHub and leads to simpler diffs when reviewing PRs. It is also a lot more concise, resulting in more homogeneity of the source of MDN documents.
```

> This homogeneity allows for the building and use of linters that will enforce a better structural and typographic coherence.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This homogeneity allows us to use linters to enforce a better structural and typographic coherence.
```

> In Q3 2022, we worked with the community to integrate the most common Markdown linter, Markdownlint, into the writing workflow. We were particularly cautious, as it is the first linter we added to the writing process. Tooling should help writers and first time contributors, not annoy them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Q3 2022, we worked with the community to integrate the most common Markdown linter, [markdownlint](https://www.npmjs.com/package/markdownlint), into the writing workflow. We were particularly cautious, as it is the first linter we added to the writing process. Tooling should help writers and first time contributors, not annoy them.
```

To simplify editing for writers, we want Markdownlint to autocorrect all what can be auto-corrected. That way, writers don't need to know all the details of using Markdown (like empty lines before lists) or of our writing guidelines (like using underscore for italics, and two stars for bold)

The challenge resides in integrating the linting with the two workflows:

* Editing using the GitHub UI.
* Editing locally and pushing the result via git.

> When editing locally, most editors (like VSCode) warn writers when they make an error. When using the online GitHub UI, there is no indication when a contributor doesn't follow the Markdownlint rules unfortunately.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When editing locally, most editors (like VSCode) warn writers when they make an error. When using the online GitHub UI, there is unfortunately no indication when a contributor doesn't follow the markdownlint rules.
```

Our challenge was to find a solution for both ways.

To solve this, we needed three pieces:

> 1. A Markdownlint bot, running daily, which fixes Markdownlint errors automatically, or notifies about non-auto-fixable errors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. A markdownlint bot, running daily, which fixes markdownlint errors automatically, or notifies about non-auto-fixable errors.
```

2. A test in the GitHub CI, flagging the errors in the PR, allowing writers to fix them manually if they want.

> 3. Markdownlint integration with Husky so each time a commit is created locally, auto-fixable errors can be fixed without contributors having to do anything.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. markdownlint integration with Husky so each time a commit is created locally, auto-fixable errors can be fixed without contributors having to do anything.
```

We have a few future improvements to perform still: we want to add more rules, like preventing images without alt texts. In order to do so, we need to fix all the existing problems to make sure the current HEAD passes with zero errors, and then update our config files to enable the test.

> Overall, Markdownlint integration went smoothly, to the point where the daily Markdownlint bot has very errors to catch. This improves the quality of the source of the docs, and we will be able to add more rules in the future.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Overall, markdownlint integration went smoothly, to the point where the daily markdownlint bot has very errors to catch. This improves the quality of the source of the docs, and we will be able to add more rules in the future.
```
